Situation:
A regional outage has been experienced in the us-central1 region of Google Cloud that has impacted multiple services like Cloud SQL databases, Cloud Storage, and Pub/Sub messaging systems. This has led to a service disruption of high availability and low downtime based business applications.

Task:
The goal is to trigger a failover and recovery process as soon as possible to ensure business continuity during the outage. The strategy will leverage Google Cloud capabilities including replicas in Cloud SQL, multi-region Cloud Storage, and Pub/Sub notifications to minimize downtime and bring service back up.

Actions:
1. Failover Procedure for Cloud SQL:
Primary Goal: Ensure database services stay available by demoting a read replica in an alternate region (e.g., us-east1).

Step-by-Step Procedure:

Monitor the outage using Cloud Monitoring (Stackdriver) to confirm the failure in the us-central1 region.

Confirm current Cloud SQL replica configuration. Ensure that a Cloud SQL read replica in another region (e.g., us-east1) exists.

If a replica exists, make the read replica primary using the following command:

bash
Copy
Edit
gcloud sql instances promote-replica [INSTANCE_NAME]
This will make the replica in us-east1 the primary database.

Update configurations for applications and DNS entries to point towards the newly promoted database in us-east1.

Proceed with monitoring database health in the new region to ensure stability.

2. Cloud Storage Failover:
Major Goal: Ensure data availability by failing over to multi-region Cloud Storage buckets.

Step-by-Step Procedure:

Verify multi-region storage configuration: Ensure Cloud Storage is configured with a multi-region bucket. If you have previously created a bucket with a regional configuration (e.g., us-central1), you must create a new multi-region bucket, or re-configure data replication between regions.

Configure Cloud Storage replication:

If you have not previously enabled cross-region replication, you may wish to use Cloud Storage's "Nearline" or "Coldline" storage classes for use in failover.

To replicate data across regions (e.g., us-east1), employ Storage Transfer Service:

bash
Copy
Edit
gsutil -m rsync -r gs://[source-bucket] gs://[destination-bucket]
Switch application endpoints to new multi-region Cloud Storage bucket when needed.

Verify data consistency and availability in the failover region.

3. Pub/Sub Failover and Notification:
Primary Goal: Be as unobtrusive as possible in event-driven applications and never lose messages during the outage.

Step-by-Step Process

Check Pub/Sub system health: Monitor your Pub/Sub topics and subscriptions with Cloud Monitoring. An outage may impact message delivery.

Configure Pub/Sub failover:

It's possible to have more than one subscription across regions so that when one region is down, messages are consumed from a different region.

For instance, create a new subscription and topic in the failover region (us-east1).

Utilize Cloud Pub/Sub's cross-region replication to send messages to the backup region.

Enable Pub/Sub alerts: Set up Google Cloud Pub/Sub alerts to notify you when you have problems or anomalies in your subscription. This helps you keep track of any failures and react immediately.

bash
Copy
Edit
gcloud pubsub topics publish [TOPIC_NAME] --message "Regional outage detected"
Reconfigure readers to read from the new region's subscription if necessary.

Check message delivery and ensure the application is receiving the messages from the failover region.
