Task:
The task is to quickly implement a failover and recovery process to ensure business continuity during the outage. The plan will leverage Google Cloud tools like Cloud SQL replicas, multi-region Cloud Storage, and Pub/Sub alerts to minimize downtime and restore services.

situation:
A regional outage has occurred in Google Cloud's us-central1 region, impacting multiple services, including Cloud SQL databases, Cloud Storage, and Pub/Sub messaging systems. This has caused a service disruption affecting critical business applications that rely on high availability and minimal downtime.


actions:
1. Cloud SQL Failover Process:
Primary Objective: Ensure that database services are still available by promoting a read replica in another region (e.g., us-east1).

Step-by-Step Process:

Monitor the outage using Cloud Monitoring (Stackdriver) to confirm the failure of the us-central1 region.

Check existing Cloud SQL replica setup. Ensure that a Cloud SQL read replica exists in another region (such as us-east1).

If a replica exists, promote the read replica to primary using the following command:

bash
Copy
Edit
gcloud sql instances promote-replica [INSTANCE_NAME]
This will make the replica in us-east1 the primary database.

Update DNS records and application configurations to point to the newly promoted database in us-east1.

Continue monitoring database health in the new region to ensure stability.

2. Cloud Storage Failover:
Primary Objective: Ensure data availability by switching to multi-region Cloud Storage buckets.

Step-by-Step Process:

Validate multi-region storage setup: Ensure Cloud Storage is configured with a multi-region bucket. If the bucket was previously created with a regional setting (e.g., us-central1), you should create a new multi-region bucket, or reconfigure data replication across multiple regions.

Configure Cloud Storage replication:

If you haven't configured cross-region replication, consider using Cloud Storage's "Nearline" or "Coldline" storage classes for failover purposes.

To replicate data across regions (e.g., us-east1), you can set up Storage Transfer Service:

bash
Copy
Edit
gsutil -m rsync -r gs://[source-bucket] gs://[destination-bucket]
Switch application endpoints to the new multi-region Cloud Storage bucket if necessary.

Verify the integrity and availability of the data in the failover region.

3. Pub/Sub Failover and Notification:
Primary Objective: Minimize disruption in event-driven applications and ensure that messages are not lost during the outage.

Step-by-Step Process:

Monitor Pub/Sub system status: Use Cloud Monitoring to check the health of your Pub/Sub topics and subscriptions. An outage could affect message delivery.

Set up Pub/Sub failover:

You can configure multiple subscriptions across regions so that if one region becomes unavailable, messages can be consumed from another region.

For example, create a new topic and subscription in the failover region (us-east1).

Use Cloud Pub/Sub's cross-region replication to replicate messages to the backup region.

Enable alerts using Pub/Sub: Set up Google Cloud Pub/Sub alerts to notify you when there are anomalies or issues in your subscription. This allows you to track any failures and react quickly.

bash
Copy
Edit
gcloud pubsub topics publish [TOPIC_NAME] --message "Regional outage detected"
Reconfigure subscribers to consume from the new region’s subscription if necessary.

Monitor message delivery and ensure that the application is receiving the messages from the failover region.
